
===== PRojects IN Controlled Environments 2 (PRINCE2) =====

PRINCE2 (PRojects IN Controlled Environments) is a widely used process-based method that is endorsed by the UK Government (Office of Government Commerce - OGC)((http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/)) as the project management standard for public projects. PRINCE2 is utilized extensively by the UK Government and it has been adopted by the private sector, not only in the UK and but also in other countries. The PRINCE2 method of project management is available in the public domain and it provides the best practice guidance on project management on a non-proprietary basis. PRINCE2 is a structured project management method that takes the user through all the essentials for running a successful project. The methodology of PRINCE2 covers several areas for the effective management, control and organisation of a project. PRINCE2 has a flexible approach and it covers all types of projects. PRINCE2 provides a framework that covers a wide variety of disciplines and activities that are required within a project. The focus throughout the PRINCE2 method is on the Business Case//[[:general:glossary|glossary]]// which describes the rationale and the business justification behind the implementation of a project. The Business Case runs all the project management processes in PRINCE2, from the initial project set-up through to the successful completion of the project.

PRINCE2 is derived from an earlier project management approach known as PROMPTII and from PRINCE project management method that was initially published by the Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency (CCTA) in 1989 as a standard for information systems (IT) project management for the UK Government. The method soon became popular and it was regularly being applied outside the purely IT environment. PRINCE2 was published in 1996 as a generic project management method and it was later revised and launched as "PRINCE2:2009 Refresh" in 2009. It has gained a widespread acceptance and has now become a de facto standard for project management in the UK. The evolution of PRINCE2 from the prior PRINCE method was largely driven by user based improvements, project management specialists and a review panel consisting of 150 public and private sector organisations. This resulted in a generic best practice tool that is flexible enough to be tailored to an organisation and used for all types of project.

==== Overview of PRINCE2 ====
PRINCE2 is a process-driven project management method and it is based on the seven principles of: Continued Business Justification; Focus on Products; Defined Roles and Responsibilities; Learn from Experience; Manage by Stages; Manage by Exception; and Tailored to Suit the Project Environment. PRINCE2 has seven themes: Business Case; Plans; Risk; Organization; Quality; Change; and Progress. The principles and themes of PRINCE2 are enlisted in the following seven processes:
1.	Starting up a project - During this process, the project team is selected and a project brief is prepared. An overall approach for the project is decided and the next stage of the project is also planned. Once this is done, the project board is needed to authorize the next stage of initiating the project. Some of the key activities that take place are: appointment of an executive and a project manager; design and appointment of a project management team; preparation of a project brief; defining the project approach; and planning of the next stage 
2.	Initiating a project – The process continues the work of the start up process and the project brief is enhanced to form a Business case. The project files are also developed as the basis for the overall plan of the project and a plan for the next stage is also created. The key activities of the process are: planning quality; planning a project; refining the business case and risks; setting up project controls; setting up project files; and compiling the Project Initiation Documentation//[[:general:glossary|glossary]]//
3.	Directing a project – The process dictates how the Project Board should control the overall project. Directing a Project also guides on how the project board should authorize a stage plan, including any stage plan that replaces an existing stage plan due to slippage or other unforeseen circumstances. Some of the key activities include: authorising initiation; authorising a project; authorising a stage or exception plan; giving ad-hoc direction; and confirming project closure.
4.	Controlling a stage – Some of the key activities of this process include: authorising work package; assessing progress; capturing and examining project issues; reviewing stage status; reporting highlights; taking corrective action; escalating project issues; and receiving a completed work package.
5.	Managing stage boundaries – The process provides guidance on what should be done towards the end of a stage. It also covers what should be done for a stage that has gone outside its tolerance levels. Some of the key activities include: planning a stage; updating a project plan; updating a project business case; updating the risk log; reporting stage end; and producing an exception plan.
6.	Managing product delivery – The process provides guidance on controlling the link between the Project Manager and the Team Manager by placing the formal requirements on accepting, executing and delivering project work. Some of the key activities are: accept a work package, execute a work package and deliver a work package.
7.	Closing a project – The process covers the things that should be completed at the end of a project. Some of the key activities are: decommissioning a project; identifying follow-on actions; and project evaluation review.

The Process Model with the flow of information (represented by arrows) is given below:

{{ :prince_ii.png?nolink |}}


==== Key Techniques of PRINCE2 ====

The key project management techniques that are described by PRINCE2 are:
1.	Product Based Planning – It is a fundamental part of the PRINCE2 project management approach and it is a method for identifying all of the products (or project deliverables) that make up or contribute for the delivery of the objectives of the project, and the associated work that are required to deliver them. A major benefit of product based planning is the ability to surface the critical assumptions and constraints. Another advantage of the technique compared to activity-based planning is the efficient reporting of processes. This method helps to capture all the activities, reducing the chances of overlooking. 
2.	Change Control Technique - Change control within the quality management systems (QMS) and IT systems is a formal process needed to ensure that the changes to a product or system are added in a controlled and coordinated manner. It reduces possibility of the addition of unnecessary changes to a system without forethought, introducing faults into systems or undoing the changes made by other users. Change Control procedure aims at minimal disruption to services, reduction in back-out activities, and cost-effective utilization of resources involved in implementing change.
3.	Quality Review Technique – It is aimed at ensuring that a project's products maintain the required standards and meet the defined quality criteria. The quality review meetings are an integral part of this technique and they are intended to identify the errors in the product. 

==== Advantages of PRINCE2 ====

PRINCE2 has defined a structured approach to project management and as such, it provides a method for managing projects within a clearly defined framework. It describes the procedures for coordinating people and activities in a project, and how to effectively design and supervise the project, and what to do if a project has to be adjusted due to unexpected results. In PRINCE2 each process is specified with the key inputs and outputs and with the specific goals and activities that are needed to be carried out, which gives the user an automatic control on any deviations from the plan. PRINCE 2 is divided into several manageable stages and thus it enables an effective control over the resources. It also allows a project to be carried out in a controlled and organised way, on the basis of close monitoring. PRINCE2 gives a common language for all the participants in project management as it is well structured and widely recognised and understood. The various management roles and responsibilities that are required in a project are fully described in PRINCE 2 and the processes are adaptable to suit the complexity of a project and skills of an organisation.
PRINCE2's formal recognition of responsibilities within a project, along with its focus on what a project is meant to deliver provides the following key benefits to an organization:
1.	A common, consistent approach for project management
2.	Controlled and organised start for a project 
3.	Regular reviews of the progress against the plan
4.	Assurance that a project continues to have a business justification


==== Comparing PrinceII with PMBOK ====
//[[:frameworks:pm_bok|PMBOK]]//
PMBOK is a knowledge-based approach that covers the vast subject of project management. On the other hand, PRINCE 2 is a process-based approach to project management that lays down a process model (of eight processes) intended to be used steps in a logical sequence by a project manager while planning and managing a project. The application of the process model can be done in most types of projects with a wide range of complexity. The PMBOK describes a set of processes that are grouped under nine Knowledge Areas that can be also linked in five groups by the project manager. The key difference between the PMBOK and PRINCE 2 is that the PMBOK provides the project manager with a considerable repository of information about proven practises in this field and facilitates the project manager to apply these where they deem appropriate whereas PRINCE2 offers a more prescriptive set of steps for the project manager and his teams to follow.
